Oh, we're in the vault.
We're in the vault.
And the books in the vault are arranged the same way that the books in the stacks are, that is in Library of Congress classification order.
So if you want, for example, to see our American literature that's down here, then we're going to the section of the PS's.
I'm just passing by a first folio, though.
That's right.
Passing by a set of the four folios.
Yeah, and they have the same bindings.
That's right.
But the four that sold at the garden last year had different bindings.
Well, that's a little different bindings.
That's kind of the same.
Yeah, Mr. Lilly bought this in the 1930s.
It's the first time I've touched a first folio.
Oh.
I've touched the Gutenberg Bible.
I touched the Caxton and the Tamerlane, but that's my first first folio.
Well, we have a Caxton and Tamerlane as well.
You do have a Tamerlane.
Yeah.
Oh, good for you.
Yeah, we do.
We don't have one anywhere in New England.
Did you know that?
No, I didn't.
Not at the American Antiquarian?
No, not at Harvard.
Go ahead.
So this is all American literature with some inscribed Mark Twain's Tamerlane, a lot of
Nice.
Was that Mr. Lilly's Ulysses?
I don't know.
I wonder if he'd afforded Ulysses.
Oh, look at the condition of that, huh?
That's a beautiful condition.
I mean, my God.
I better want to fill it up.
I'm going to write a few things down.
I don't see Mr. Lilly's book.
I've never seen a Ulysses.
Yeah, it's beautiful.
Perfect condition.
I don't know how they use any of the stuff in the store, but it's just that.
I touched it.
That was enough.
And the first limited edition of T.E.
Lawrence.
Oh, that's a toughie, isn't it?
Yeah.
How do you decide what... Now, what have we got here?
This is the first edition of Alice in Wonderland, the 1865 Alice.
That's the tough one.
That's the one he tried to destroy, right?
That's right.
And then the American, the 1866.
And what else?
We have a lot of...
The first editions of Dickens, published in the original parts.
Could you open up the... Shakespeare is pretty special to me.
Yeah.
Open up the first folio to the frontispiece.
Sure.
This will make my... I'm putting the pen away.
I know.
I've got... Oh, my goodness.
May I hold this stuff down?
Oh.
It's really something.
This is good.
What's the provenance of this?
It was a set.
I'd have to look it up.
I'll check it out.
This is making my day.
Don't worry about it.
I was just going to see whether there were any book plates.
I got it.
What were your book plates?
Oh, it is.
Oh, there it is.
Okay.
I'm going to take out my pen.
I don't know.
It's way over here.
Your caxton's in this room, too?
Yeah, it's right down.
Here's the caxton tosser, the 1477, and here's the caxton.
Can I see one?
Yeah.
Really, really bought some wonderful thing.
Oh, look at the condition of this!
Yeah, well, it is racking a number of leaves at the front, so I love the prologue.
This is a rebinding itself.
Okay, but it's wooden wood.
Yeah.
Let me just fill the paper.
And which Caxton is this?
This is the first of the Canterbury Tales, the 1477.
We also have the second edition published a few years later that's the first illustrated.
Mm-hmm.
Do you have any quartos?
Any Shakespeare quartos?
Yeah, Huntington has it.
All we have is one of the false-dated quartos, the ones, let's say, 1600, but early 1619.
Whew, that's exciting.
And that's, which, Cameron, is that?
It's a very early... 1481, obviously.
And let's see, we've got some good stuff on the other side.
This is the first American edition of the Audubon.
This is a beautiful set in the original.
I've already got my kick for the day.
You have the elephant folio?
Yeah, it's not down here, it's elsewhere.
It's too big to take out.
This is where a lot of the Bibles usually go, but they're in the
Now, do you keep the Gutenberg on permanent display?
Yes, we do.
Is it a two-line Gutenberg?
Unfortunately, all we have is the New Testament.
We don't have the Old Testament.
Oh.
And here's the first of Homer in Greek, 1488.
This is down here.
This is Jefferson Davis' copy of the Constitution.
Oh, ma'am.
I held the first printing of the... of the...
Constitution, which is owned by a private collector in Santa Barbara, Dave Karpolis.
Have you ever heard of him?
No, I haven't.
He's a fascinating story.
You'll see it in my book.
Okay, we have one of the draft proofs, I guess.
Yeah.
It's Jefferson Davis' copy of the Constitution.
Okay.
And Samuel Pennypacker has written in this book, you know, about Jefferson Davis, his book, and little good did it do him.
Do that again?
This is the Pet Pennypacker.
It was quite an important book.
Yeah, you can read.
Okay, this book, and little good did it do him, Samuel W. Pennypacker, April 27, 1895, and it is signed Jefferson Davis, 21st December, 1848.
No, it has to be 18... Give me the date on that again?
1848.
Okay.
Yeah.
1848.
Yeah, this is something...
What is it now?
It's an edition of the Constitution.
Okay.
Of the United States.
I'm sorry.
I thought we were handling it.
No, we've got the Confederate Constitution.
Okay.
I was off on that.
Well, that makes it a very, very, very, very interesting item.
That's right.
The U.S.
1848.
That's the 1846 edition of the Constitution.
He signed it 1848.
Yeah.
And this is Thomas Jefferson's copy of the first printing of the Bill of Rights, which was printed as part of the acts passed to the Congress of the United States.
How did you guys get that?
The question is asked.
It came from Mr. Lilly's collection again.
And this is the transmittal letter from the President's office from George Washington.
May I?
I'll read it.
Yeah.
The President of the United States requests the Secretary of State to accept the enclosed volume of laws passed during the first session of the Congress of the United States, March 29th, 1790.
And so Jefferson was Washington's Secretary of State.
And so does Jefferson sign this anywhere?
Well, he does in his own way.
Jefferson marked his books in a particular...
In signature I, since there was no J in lettering these signatures, he wrote a T in Thomas Jefferson, and he did the same thing in signature T. Well, it's held up pretty nicely, doesn't it?
Oh, yeah, it has.
Just a little yellow.
Okay, I got you.
So that is his T. That is his, yeah.
And so this was bound.
While he was Secretary of State.
It's a treat.
Today's like a frenzy of treasures.
Douglas Debates.
It's a presentation copy from Abraham Lincoln.
It looks like we could have been bound, you know, 20 years ago, doesn't it?
Well, again, these are all boxes.
Okay.
Can I see it?
Yeah.
Who did he present it to, I wonder?
Steven Winchester.
Is that in pencil?
Uh-huh.
Yeah?
Yeah.
And again, is this Mr. Lilly?
That I don't know.
Carol Edward Wilson.
Carol A. Wilson, who's a noted... Again, magnificent condition.
Oh, Lincoln Jefferson of Washington.
So this is some of our Western Americana.
This is the first edition of the...
a published report of the Lewis and Clark expedition in the original boards.
A history of the expedition and the command of Captains Lewis and Clark.
This is such a rare item.
1814.
Do you enjoy coming in here?
Oh, yes.
I guess the decision on what comes in here is kind of a judgment call, right?
Yeah.
We know it when we see it.
Yeah, and that's all Bill Cagle's decision.
Yeah.
Early Mexican and Japanese-related...
First War and Peace.
Is that in the Russian?
Yes, it is.
I have a number of important books.
Probably signed by Felstead, right?
That I would doubt.
I would doubt.
Let me see.
Francis Bacon?
Yeah, we have Francis Bacon.
A lot of nice original bacon.
This is...
Isaac Newton, you know?
Oh, yeah.
We've got, uh, this is the first edition of the Principia.
I do like the Principia.
Yeah.
Beautiful coffee and wonderful early vineyard.
Wow.
That's... That's Mr. Loeb.
...Exlibris.
Yeah.
Kirby Lilly.
Josiah Kirby Lilly.
Sorry about that.
I've been up since 5 o'clock this morning.
I don't have to forgive me.
Philosophy Naturalis Principia Mathematica.
And what was the year on that?
1687.
Not bad, huh?
So we have a number of important sciences.
The history of science and medicine was an area that Mr. Raleigh called.
That would make sense, wouldn't it?
Yeah.
Here we have one of our most important, probably our most important binding.
This is one of the... This would be my third boy.
And, wow.
Well, it's a Fort Siler, who I interviewed.
You've heard of him down in Washington?
Oh, yeah.
Let me handle this.
This has been on exhibit at the Grolier Club when they had it there.
It's a big exhibition.
Wow.
So, as is the case in the other areas, things that are too large.
I don't have to handle anything else.
I've been satiated.
You get the idea.
We did one, two, we did ten.
This is the record.
Yeah, and there are also a number of manuscripts down here as well.
Well, what would be really great?
Well, that's something that you'd have to talk to the curator of manuscripts about.
We're running out of time anyway.
We do have, for example, George Washington's letter accepting the presidency.
of the United States.
That's just so bad.
You wonder why something like that is not in the National Archives, don't you?
Well, it was written to someone who, you know, and it descended, it was written to John Langdon, and it descended through John Langdon's family, and eventually was sold to the Lilly in the 1970s.
That's very interesting.
Yeah, that's how a guy out in California got the Confederate States of America Constitution.
Really?
It was in the Georgia State House for a hundred years until his people parents said, we need the money.
We'd like our Constitution back.
And he says, what are you, crazy?
I said, look it up.
Lo and behold.
Well, it was just wonderful.
Thank you.
What a heck.
Is there any questions you've got?
I was just wrapping up.
I'm going to go and purchase some documents, some things, and then I think I'll look at the exhibit and take a few photographs and head back to Chicago.
This is the Lincoln Room, which houses a portion of our Lincoln collection.
We're getting the exhibition cases
Now, not related to Lincoln, it's a selection of Arabic manuscripts, because there's something going on on campus this month, and that's in connection.
Do you have any catalogs in these things?
Of these small exhibitions?
No.
No, we put in probably between 30 and 40 exhibitions each year, and only two or three of them get cataloged, but we do produce checklists for some of the smaller ones.
This is a replica of something.
Well, it's just a room decorated in the style of the American Southwest.
This is called the Ellison Room, and houses a portion of the collection that was formed by Robert Ellison, whose portrait is up there.
And the Lily 25th anniversary book tells about Ellison, but that's where we got a lot of our good Western Americana.
And this was built for him?
Well, he died in the 40s, and when the collection got moved over to the Lily in 1960,
This room was specially built to house a part of it to be a memorial room.
It's now also used as a classroom, because we have classes meeting frequently in the lily.
This room right over here is called the Elizabeth Ball Room.
Elizabeth Ball was who?
She was of the Ball Family of Mercy, Indiana, with ball canning jars and so forth, and she collected historical children's books.
She was a collector?
Mm-hmm.
her collection of some eight to ten thousand children's books in 1983.
Phyllis Ball.
Elizabeth Ball.
I'm sorry.
I was looking at Phyllis Wheatley and you know how that happens, right?
It's Elizabeth with an S. Elizabeth.
What was her little?
Elizabeth Ball.
Collector of, what was her special?
Children's books.
Okay.
And again, there's a chapter on children's literature.
And she's in there?
She's in there, yeah.
Okay.
Really small women feel like there's a heart to come by, as you probably know, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
There are just a couple more rooms that are normally locked upstairs.
If you want, I can show you better.
You got the time?
Yeah.
I know, I'm coming back here again.
But we haven't put the label again.
Right here, this came from Mr. Lilly as well.
Moyer?
Sir Peter.
I don't know why.
Must be an ancestor, right?
George Sand.
Samuel Pepys, whose library I visited in Cambridge.
Very nice.
Handled his diary.
Oh.
Entering the Woodsworth Room.
This is a very substantial structure, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
This is used for small seminars, and it also holds a portion of our collection of books related to William Wordsworth.
Any manuscript stuff on Wordsworth?
We do have some.
They're not kept in its room.
We have some.
Wordsworth bust is
also very important one that was the one that Wordsworth really liked and all that.
We sent that to the New York Public Library traveling Wordsworth in the exhibition a couple of years ago.
For the Fort Siler, Shelley and the Sheikho.
Yeah, it was a big book, Wordsworth and the Age of Romance.
There must be stuff from the Fort Siler.
Well, there was a little bit, but there was a lot of stuff from England.
This is the Mendel, M-E-N-D-E-L room?
Mendel.
Mendel?
Yeah.
Oh, this is beautiful, isn't it?
Yeah, Mr. Mendel was a collector and dealer for a while.
He also, he owned in the 1950s and 60s, he owned the firm of Lathrop Harper.
Oh, really?
In New York, yeah.
Renato Mendel, M-E-N-D-E-L, bookman extraordinaire, 1895, 1967.
That's right.
Is that a publication you published?
I'd probably purchase a copy of that one.
I don't think that's out there, but I can get you a copy.
Can you?
I need as many things as I can get, by the way.
Well, look at the books.
Gorgeous.
Now, he collected some bindings currently.
Well, he collected books related to the history of Latin America, as well as early voyages and travels.
That's where we got our atlases.
Our Ptolemies came from Mendel.
But the Mendel collection, as we received it,
consisted of about 40,000 books and 26,000 manuscripts.
Wow.
This was a gift or a purchase?
That was a purchase.
And then there were gifts as well, but a lot of it was purchased.
While he was alive?
Yes.
And then after his death, his widow donated the capital stock of Laker of Harper to the university.
And so for a while, Indiana University was the official owner of Laker of Harper.
What's in this room is probably about 5% of the Mendel Collection at most.
But this is now used as an office for Dr. Cecil Bird, who was the first head of Special Collections at IU in the 1940s.
And he's kind of an emeritus type of a... Yeah, and he comes in and works on exhibitions for us.
He's got one on the California Gold Rush that's going in next year.
It's taken largely from the Allison Collection.
That must be Mrs. Mendel.
Mrs. Mendel still lives in Bloomington.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh, so they lived in Bloomington?
Is this how we made the connection?
No, they visited Bloomington frequently, and then I think, you know, they would be in Bloomington for part of the year and New York for part of the year.
So they kind of followed the collection?
The collection, right.
Now again, that's a cute little... Yeah.
And so this is another exhibit area.
Is this the...
Is this the portrait of Peeps?
The one that's on his book plate?
I don't know.
I wonder if that's the original painting.
That's the picture.
He basically used his book plate.
That's the overview.
Terrific.
So you were at the Newberry yesterday?
I did a little work at the Newberry.
I was there for two days, actually.
research.